---
layout: page
title: About
image: montauk.jpg
permalink: /about/
resume: /Andrew_Burford_Resume.pdf
---

I am pursuing an M.S. in Computer Science at Stony Brook University,
where I also completed a B.S. in Computer Science and a B.S. in
Applied Math and Statistics. I'm currently working as a research
assistant in the [File systems and Storage
Lab](https://www.fsl.cs.sunysb.edu) at Stony Brook where we are
investigating the application of machine learning to file and storage
systems. I'm interested in many fields in computer science such as
machine learning, cybersecurity, and storage systems, but really I
love any programming project that requires a strong
mathematical understanding of what's going on. I am also an avid
runner.

### Personal Background

Having had a interest in computers since a young age, I started my
first real programming projects in high school. I taught myself basic
programming skills and started learning about iOS app development. By
my sophomore year, I had developed and published an app on the iOS App
Store. I was also able to start taking formal programming classes in
school, and by senior year I was volunteering at my high school as a
full stack web developer working on the school's internal websites.
During my last 2 months of high school, I completed a senior capstone
project where I developed a system for students to securely mark their
attendance in class using their phone.

It was also during my senior year of high school that I lead a trail
maintenance community service project earning the final requirement to
become an Eagle Scout. In addition to helping me acquire strong
leadership and communication skills, scouting also instilled in me a
profound appreciation for the outdoors. I love hiking, camping,
kayaking, climbing, rafting, mountain biking, and everything in
between. The picture above is from a solo bikepacking trip I did one
summer from Stony Brook to Montauk. My favorite sport, however, is
running. I've served as the the captain of my high school team and the
President of my university's running club.  Running has remained a
part of my daily schedule since I first joined the sport, and I hope
to keep it that way for as long I'm able.

After an offer for a full-tuition scholarship from Stony Brook
Univeristy and admittance to their Computer Science Honors Track as
well as their Honors College, I moved to Long Island to begin my
undergraduate degree in Computer Science and Applied Mathematics and
Statistics. By my second semester of freshman year, I had found an on
campus job working for the high performance computing support team,
where I would work part-time on top of a full course load until my
last semester of undergrad. At the end of my junior year, I applied to
Stony Brook's Accelerated B.S./M.S. Program for Computer Science,
putting me on track to complete all three degrees in 4.5 years.

<!-- vim:tw=70
-->
